<!-- source: library/conferences/New England Symposium on Statistics in Sports/2017/2017 - What does it mean to draft perfectly - Unknown Authors.pdf -->



<mark>What Does It Mean To Draft Perfectly?</mark> We define what it means for an NHL team to be successful in drafting, and use this framework to determine if any teams exhibited a sustained edge in drafting from 2000 to 2009. At a high level, we compare actual draft **Looking** outcomes to teams’ **perfect draft** outcomes. The perfect draft can be thought of as what would happen if a GM could redo a draft with complete knowledge **Backward** of prospects’ career values as well as other teams’ choices, while all other teams act just as they did previously. **Optimizing the Philadelphia Flyers’ ‘07 Draft Selections** <mark>PS: Career Point Shares from hockey-reference.com (through 2015-16)</mark> 

Namita Nandakumar Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania Email: namitan@wharton.upenn.edu Twitter: @nnstats 

**Draft Case Study: Johnny Gaudreau Optimizing the Philadelphia Flyers’ ‘07 Draft Selections** _“Calgary beat us to the punch. There were people_ <mark>PS: Career Point Shares from hockey-reference.com (through 2015-16)</mark> _banging their hands on the table, like, ‘Oh, we should have taken him a round earlier.’ It’s a_ **_Backwards calculated risk_** _. The Flames got Gaudreau in a_ **Best Player Available Best Player Available** **_really good spot_** _.”_ **Pick Player PS Pick Player PS** ~ John Weisbrod, former Bruins scout 2 Jamie Benn 55.8 182 Justin Braun 21.1 Gaudreau was drafted with the 2011 104<sup>th</sup> overall 41 P.K. Subban 52.8 161 Carl Gunnarsson 23.9 pick. Calgary was very excited about his potential, but they never approached him before draft day 66 Alec Martinez 27.7 152 Carl Hagelin 21.1 and only used their 4<sup>th</sup> round pick on him. Why? 122 Jake Muzzin 24.6 122 Jamie Benn 55.8 152 Carl Gunnarsson 23.9 66 Alec Martinez 27.7 In a competitive environment like **Let’s Talk About** drafting, teams care about other 161 Carl Hagelin 21.1 41 P.K. Subban 52.8 teams’ choices. **If you think he’ll be Game Theory around at your next pick, just wait.** 182 Justin Braun 21.1 2 Max Pacioretty 46.2 Calgary waited as long as they could before drafting Johnny Gaudreau, which maximized their 4<sup>th</sup> round It turns out that the notion of best player available is still relevant: we just have to **work backwards** . If we travel back in time with full pick’s return on investment and knowledge of prospects’ career values, we can apply the classic helped them extract value from all game theoretic algorithm of backwards induction to figure out our rounds. We can model drafting in a best case scenario for that year. Selecting the best player available way that reflects this consideration: from our last pick to our first pick ensures that we draft the best teams aren’t always trying to select players while always picking them right before any other team does. the best player available. For the Flyers in 2007, this means drafting Jamie Benn at 122<sup>nd</sup> overall rather than 2<sup>nd</sup> , because it’s right before Dallas got him at 129<sup>th</sup> overall . This allows them to draft Max Pacioretty with the 2<sup>nd</sup> **Now, to evaluate drafting, we** pick, as he would not have been available later on in the draft. Of course, we aren’t accounting for the butterfly effects of this scenario, **can travel back in time...** but it gives us an idea of the maximum value available at _every_ pick. **Did Your Team Draft Badly in the 2000s? Perfect Draft Value = Total Actual Value Drafted = Total Draft Efficiency =  Actual Value Drafted = 16.5% Career Value of Actual Picks Career Value of Optimal Perfect Draft Value** **<mark>For the        Flyers in 2007:</mark> Picks = 248.6 Point Shares = 41.1 Point Shares** <mark>NHL Team Draft Efficiency Rank by Year</mark> This means that the Flyers extracted roughly **Draft efficiency** 16.5% of the value that was available to them in **penalizes the Blackhawks** the 2007 draft. We can evaluate any team’s actual **and helps the** performance versus their best case scenario in a **Red Wings** given year using draft efficiency. It’s an easy way to **the most.** compare team draft outcomes more fairly than by simply summing up drafted player values. With **From 2000 to** draft efficiency percentages, teams with better **2009, no team is** picks have higher benchmarks for success in **significantly** terms of their perfect draft values. **better or worse than average Set yourself up to succeed!** Perfect draft value increases as you accumulate more and better picks, and it’s **when it comes** correlated positively and linearly with actual value drafted (r = 0.45). No teams can consistently outperform the . **to drafting.** league in terms of drafting efficiently, so the best way to draft well is to draft early and often: **trust the process Why Should You Care Now?** What do these ideas mean for an NHL scouting department **We need to define a few extra inputs:** trying to figure out next year’s picks? The optimal solution for maximizing the total value of a team’s draft picks relies not Here, we have **sample** input values*** for a 5-pick draft (presumably occurring in **Looking** only on expected future NHL value, but also on when prospects 2015). The NHL value function is truly up to you: it can be statistically modeled or are projected to be drafted by any other team. With enough even calculated based on scouts’ projections. In this sample scenario, your **Forward** predictive precision, we can simulate draft outcomes and estimations of some prospects differ from market estimations. Suppose you have the 3<sup>rd</sup> and 5<sup>th</sup> prescribe a set of picks that results in more value added than picks in this draft: how can you leverage your superior knowledge? simply always selecting the best player left on the draft board. **Every Available Preference Prospect Draft Position Probability Distribution E[NHL Value] Order It turns out that precisely predicting the future is quite difficult.** For one thing, the question of assigning draft position probabilities to all relevant **Player Pick 1 Pick 2 Pick 3 Pick 4 Pick 5 Value Preference** prospects is tricky, as we don’t know ahead of time who will be drafted. Fortunately, we can rely on the NHL Central Scouting Service’s pre-draft rankings to define our prospect Connor McDavid 0.9 0.05 0.03 0.01 0.01 5 1 pool; roughly 83% of players selected in recent NHL entry drafts were ranked by the CSS Jack Eichel 0.05 0.6 0.3 0.03 0.02 4 2 beforehand. These rankings are divided by position (skater or goalie) as well as by junior team location (North America or Europe). Using 2011-17 CSS data, we can get a sense of Pavel Zacha 0.03 0.2 0.4 0.3 0.07 1 5 how the probability of being selected in each round varies by pre-draft rank. See below Kyle Connor 0.01 0.1 0.2 0.6 0.09 2 4 (?) for the results of logistic regressions predicting draft round from skater ranks. Travis Konecny 0.01 0.05 0.07 0.06 0.81 3 3 (?) Moving forward, we can add in more prospect ranking systems as well as other relevant variables (size, age, junior point production, etc.) in order to define probability estimates We can try moving him down to 4<sup>th</sup> on the We initially order our preferences by best player at the pick level rather than the round level. Then, we feed those probabilities into our preference list, despite our **(hypothetical)** belief available. Other teams’ picks are simulated draft optimizer along with our NHL value projections. that he will be a better NHL player than Kyle based on the above probabilities, while we Connor. This results in a higher expected value of always select our most preferred player. We see all draft picks because we can _usually_ wait to that we often select Konecny because our team likes him more than the market does. select Konecny without missing out. ***These are fictional values. Please don’t tweet angrily at me if you love Pavel Zacha or something. 



<!-- Start of picture text -->
Set yourself up to succeed!<br><!-- End of picture text -->


