<!-- source: library/conferences/New England Symposium on Statistics in Sports/2015/2015 - Data mining Major League Baseball's pace of play problem - Unknown Authors.pdf -->

- **Data Mining Major League Baseball’s Pace of Play Problem** Aaron Crowley, Zhuolin He, and Rachael Hageman Blair 

- Department of Biostatistics, State University of New York at Buffalo 







<!-- Start of picture text -->
Introduction Materials and Methods Discussion<br>Baseball has been as America’s na- Data Statistical Models •<br>long recognized is most of the<br>Offensive production predictive<br>tional America’s fondness<br>pastime. Unfortunately, are downloaded from the Ret- Two statistical data are utilized of<br>Yearly game logs mining techniques length games.<br>for baseball has faded over the to-<br>•<br>years, shifting rosheet public website [3]. to extract parsimonious models for inference [4]. The number of pitchers and walks were found to<br>wards football.<br>prolong games the most.<br>• •<br>The of is the variable. Lasso a method that<br>length games response Regression: regularization<br>•<br>Close games take more time to complete than<br>• Home and team statistics are feature selection.<br>supports<br>away aggregated<br>40% G<br>blow outs.<br>G G •<br>together for use as predictor variables. Principal Component Regression: a dimension<br>30%<br>G • Nine between the 2000 and reduction method<br>inning games played Future Work<br>20% G<br>G G G GG G 2014 season are included in the<br>G regular analysis. All data was processed and analyzed using R version<br>G G<br>GG G<br>G<br>GG G<br>10%<br>•<br>dataset contains observations and 3.2.2<br>•<br>Analysis 33,208 [5, 6, 7]. Evaluate the of the new of rules<br>impact pace play<br>0% 26 variables without data.<br>any missing after the completion of the 2015 MLB season.<br>1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010<br>Year Results<br>G<br>Baseball Basketball Contact Information<br>Football Hockey<br>Lasso Regression Principal Component Regression<br>“<br>Figure 1: Results of Gallup polls asking What is your favorite 0.6 Presented by Aaron Crowley<br>Number of Pitchers Left on Base Walks Runs Scored<br>”<br>to watch? 0.3 Length of Game • acc34@buffalo.edu<br>sport [1].<br>0.2<br>Runs Scored<br>0.1 •<br>https://aaronccrowley.wordpress.com/<br>At the same time, the length of Major League Base- 0.0 Run Differential<br>−0.1<br>Strikeouts Singles Put Outs Run Differential Singles References<br>ball have 0.3<br>(MLB) games steadily grown. 0.4<br>Doubles<br>0.2<br>0.1<br>Triples<br>0.0<br>Baseball. URL<br>3.0 −0.1 Home Runs [1] Gallup. http:<br>Stolen Bases Doubles Errors Wild Pitches<br>.<br>0.3 Sacrifice Hits //www.gallup.com/poll/1696/baseball.aspx<br>0.2<br>2.5 Sacrifice Flies MLBPA and MLB. MLB announce<br>0.1 0.2 [2] MLBPA,<br>0.0<br>Batters Hit By Pitch pace-of-game initiatives, replay modifications.<br>−0.1<br>2.0 Batters Hit By Pitch Caught Stealing Assists Intentional Walks Walks MLBPA/MLB News Release, 2015.<br>0.3<br>0.2 Intentional Walks [3] David Smith et al. Retrosheet website. URL<br>1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 0.1<br>.<br>Strikeouts<br>http://www.retrosheet.org/<br>Year 0.0<br>0.0<br>−0.1<br>Sacrifice Flies Double Plays Home Runs Passed Balls Stolen Bases [4] Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani, Jerome Friedman, T<br>0.3 J and R Tibshirani. The elements of<br>Figure 2: The average length of regular season MLB games from Caught Stealing Hastie, Friedman,<br>0.2<br>statistical volume 2. 2009.<br>1940 to 2014. 0.1 Catcher’s Interference learning, Springer,<br>0.0<br>Left on Base<br>−0.1 [5] R Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for<br>Sacrifice Hits Balks Triple Plays Catcher’s Interference<br>−0.2<br>Number of Pitchers Statistical R Foundation for Statistical<br>In the 2015 season, MLB implemented new rules to 0.3 Computing.<br>0.2 Wild Pitches Computing, Vienna, Austria, 2015. URL<br>address the of issue<br>pace play [2].<br>0.1<br>.<br>http://www.R-project.org/<br>0.0 Balks<br>• Batters must keep one foot in the batter’s box −0.1 Triples Put Outs Jerome Trevor and Rob Tibshirani.<br>[6] Friedman, Hastie,<br>0.3<br>during an at bat. Assists Regularization paths for generalized linear models via<br>0.2 −0.4<br>coordinate descent. Journal of statistical<br>• 0.1 software,<br>A timer is used to limit the time between each Errors<br>0.0 33(1):1, 2010.<br>Passed Balls<br>and −0.1<br>half-inning pitching change.<br>• −6 −4 −2 Double Plays [7] Bjørn-Helge Mevik, Ron Wehrens, and Kristian Hovde<br>who do not with the new rules λ<br>Players comply log( )<br>Liland. pls: Partial least squares and principal component<br>will be fined. Triple Plays<br>−0.6 regression. R package version, 2:3, 2011.<br>3: of the estimated standardized for<br>Figure Profiles coefficients Offensive Ground Power Small<br>Production  Balls Hitting Ball<br>the lasso models. Each curve a<br>Objective regression represents coeffi- (1) Components(2) (3) (4) Acknowledgements<br>cient as a function of the λ . The blue<br>complexity parameter<br>•<br>Identify a robust predictive model for the length vertical lines represent the best model determined by ten-fold Figure 4: A heatmap of the principal component regression load-<br>The information used here was obtained free of charge from and<br>of MLB to understand it’s cross-validation. Variables are in order ings. The loadings are correlations between each variable and<br>games relationship displayed ascending by is copyrighted by Retrosheet. Interested parties may contact<br>with batting, pitching, and fielding performance. the absolute value of their coefficient in the best model. the principal components in the model. Retrosheet at 20 Sunset Rd., Newark, DE 19711.<br>Response Rate<br>Length of Games (hours)<br>Standardized Coefficients<br><!-- End of picture text -->


